
The parties lived together in Listowel, Ontario, from June 1995 until their marriage on June 22, 1996. A Prenuptial agreement was signed two days before the wedding between Erika (the "wife") and Erika (the "partner").

The wife and her family owned the majority of shares in W Inc. The wife's father wished to ensure that shares of that company stayed within the family. Family members entered into certain agreements which provided that any family member who wished to continue to hold shares in W Inc. had to enter into a marriage contract.

Before the parties' marriage, the wife informed the partner that a marriage contract had to be signed or the wedding would not take place. She told her that the sole purpose of the contract was to keep shares of W Inc. in the family.

The contract excluded all of the wife's business interests from net family property and severely restricted the partner's right to support.

At the time the marriage contract was signed, the wife was a very wealthy woman. The wife and her family own the majority of shares of Wescast Industries Inc. ("Wescast"), the world's largest manufacturer of exhaust manifolds, and a publicly traded company. The wife's father created a complex corporate structure that included a number of different companies and a family trust (the "Family Trust").

In 1996, the wife and her three siblings each held 25 per cent of the common shares of three companies within the corporate structure: RyVan Inc. ("RyVan"), Grannyco Investments Ltd. ("Grannyco") and RWL Investments Ltd. ("RWL"). In addition, all four siblings were the sole beneficiaries of the Family Trust, in which there were significant assets.

It was always the desire of the wife's father to protect the shares of the family company. Thus, any child contemplating marriage was instructed to enter into a pre-nuptial agreement, or marriage contract, in which it was provided that the proposed spouse release all claims to Wescast shares. In this way, the wife's father intended to keep the shares of the company within the family.

As it was frequently the subject of conversation around the dinner table at family gatherings, the wife, her siblings and their prospective partners knew of the desire to maintain control of Wescast shares within the family.

The model marriage contract contained provisions to protect the family's control of Wescast. The agreements restricted the actions that could be taken directly against the family companies and stipulated the method of valuation of the company shares for the purposes of a property or support claim.

Before their engagement in December 1995, the partner was aware that if she and Erika were to marry, they would have to enter into a marriage contract as the wife's father wanted to make sure that the Wescast shares stayed within the family.

Ms. Bales' first draft of the contract, which she sent to the wife, provided that the family companies were to be treated as excluded property, including any property into which they could be traced.

Schedule A was the only financial disclosure provided by the wife. It indicated that the wife had no debts. Her net worth was disclosed as "$80,000 + Family Companies interest" (the Trust). It disclosed that the $80,000 was held in RRSPs, bank accounts and the original house deposit. It disclosed that the wife owned 100 common shares in RyVan Inc. This Schedule was accompanied by a declaration that each party had fully and completely disclosed to the other the nature and extent of all of his or her significant assets.

The wife claims that contingent interest in the Trust has a "very minimal value" at the date of marriage.

The wife did not wish to pay the partner support in the event of a marriage breakdown. A significant change in the final draft severely restricted the partner's right to claim support if there was a marriage breakdown.

The partner's ability to claim spousal support is limited. She doesn't share in the increase in value of virtually all of the wife's assets without knowing the wife's income from all sources, and without having any idea of her net worth.

There are two young children of the marriage.