Neutral citation number: [2022] EWFC 67
Case Number ZZ21D12436
IN THE CENTRAL FAMILY COURT
B E T W E E N:
SC

Applicant

- and TC
Respondent
(Acting by Emma Gaudern, his litigation friend)

IMPORTANT NOTICE
This judgment was delivered in private. The
judge has given leave for this version of the
judgment to be published, but the anonymity
of the members of the family, including the
child of the family, must be strictly
observed.
All persons, including representatives of the
media, must ensure that this condition is
strictly complied with. Failure to do so will
be a contempt of court.

Mr Joe Rainer (Counsel instructed by Withers LLP, Solicitors) appeared on behalf of the
Applicant wife
Ms Lily Mottahedan (Counsel instructed by Vardags Ltd, Solicitors) appeared on behalf of
the Respondent husband
Written Judgment of His Honour Judge Edward Hess dated 20th May 2022
1. This case concerns the financial remedies proceedings arising out of the divorce
between Ms SC (to whom I shall refer as “the wife”) and Mr TC (to whom I shall
refer as “the husband”).
2. In a report dated 11th February 2022 from Dr Kiran Chohan, Chartered Clinical
Psychologist, the husband was reported as not having mental capacity to conduct
these proceedings (or give oral evidence). This finding was not disputed by either
party and was accepted by the court and, by my order of 3rd March2022, I accordingly
appointed Ms Emma Gaudern of EMG Solicitors to be the husband’s litigation friend.
She has acted helpfully in this capacity since then and during the final hearing.
1

3. The case proceeded to a final hearing over four days on 5th, 6th, 19th and 20th May
2022.
4. Both parties appeared before me by Counsel: Mr Joe Rainer for the wife (instructed
by Withers LLP, Solicitors) and Ms Lily Mottahedan for the husband (instructed by
Vardags Ltd, Solicitors). I am grateful to both Counsel for the helpful, skilful,
courteous and clear way they have respectively conducted their cases – both parties
have been represented before me at the highest level; but it has, of course, come at a
high cost. The wife has incurred a total of £280,482 in legal costs and the husband a
total of £418,236 – nearly £700,000 of family money has gone to lawyers, never to be
recovered. In fairness to the Solicitors, this has not been a straightforward case,
procedurally or evidentially, and I do not criticise the way in which the case has been
handled on either side – but it is still of course a large amount of money to incur in
legal fees in the context of the available assets.
5. The court was presented with an electronic bundle running to more than 800 pages
and a number of other documents have been exchanged during the final hearing. I
have considered all the documents presented to me, in particular I have considered:(i)

A collection of applications and court orders.

(ii)

Material from the wife including her Form E dated 18th May 2021, her
answers to questionnaire dated 24th June 2021, her replies to a schedule of
deficiencies dated 23rd July 2021, and witness statements dated 16th April
2021 and 22nd March 2022.

(iii)

Material from the husband including his Form E dated 21st May 2021, his
answers to questionnaire dated 22nd June 2021, his replies to a schedule of
deficiencies dated 23rd July 2021, his witness statements dated 24th March
2021 and 25th May 2021 and the statement of Ms Gaudern on his behalf
dated 23rd March 2022.

(iv)

Material consisting of various expert reports from Dr Dominic Paviour
(Consultant Neurologist) and Dr Michael Gross (Consultant Neurologist),
perhaps the most significant of which for my purposes was their joint
statement dated 3rd March 2022.

(v)

Material consisting of various expert reports from Ms Amy Goddard,
Senior Occupational Therapist.

(vi)

Various material from expert valuers and accountants.

(vii)

The file created by Mr Simon Pigott, a partner in Levison Meltzer Pigott
Solicitors, relating to his dealings with the husband in 2014.

(viii)

Properly completed ES1 and ES2 documents.

2

(ix)

Selected correspondence and other disclosure material.

6. I have also heard oral evidence from the wife and from Ms Emma Gaudern, in each
case subjected to appropriate cross-examination.
7. I have also had the benefit of full submissions from each counsel in their respective
opening notes and their closing partly oral and partly written submissions.
8. The history of the marriage is as follows:(i)

The husband is aged 58. He worked successfully for many years in the
field of international investment banking, but has not worked since June
2020 as a result of his increasingly debilitating neurological condition, of
which more detail later.

(ii)

The wife is aged 50. She is an intelligent and able person, having taken her
university education through an Undergraduate Degree at a leading
university and on to a Masters level, and worked for a while for NGOs, but
has largely been a homemaker in more recent times.

(iii)

They met in 1994 and married in 1994. In 1998 the parties jointly
purchased Property X in north London and that became the family home
for more than twenty years.

(iv)

The marriage produced one child: MC (now aged 17, very nearly 18, and
currently in his last days and weeks at a private boarding school).

(v)

The parties prospered financially during the marriage and purchased a
substantial number of valuable real properties, both as homes and as
investments. My clear impression is that most of the money for these
investments came from the husband’s substantial earnings; but that the
wife was involved in the buying and managing process and her name
appears on the legal title and mortgage of most of the properties. In this
sense the purchase and management of real properties was very much a
team effort.

(vi)

From about 2003/2004 the husband began to experience the early effects
of Parkinson’s Disease and his condition was formally diagnosed in 2011
and has progressively deteriorated, of which more detail later.

(vii)

At least by 2013 (and probably significantly before that) the marriage had
become unhappy and turbulent and the absence of sexual intimacy in their
relationship was a source of distress to the husband. In late December
2013 matters took a dramatic turn. The husband decided to visit a sex
worker. He quickly felt guilty and ashamed about what he had done and
regretted his action. In early January 2014 he told the wife what had
3

happened. Very understandably, she was not happy to hear what she was
told and my perception is that she acted with a mixture of distress and
anger. One (I think representative) example of her contemporaneous
thinking about this event is contained in the text message sent by her to the
husband’s mother on 14th February 2014 which includes the comment: “I
cry for the death of my husband! My husband died the day he went to see
that prostitute in December”. She was not minded readily to forgive the
husband for his transgression. In her witness statement, she says: “I felt
emotionally devastated and was in a terrible place personally”. Her initial
reaction was, or certainly appeared to the husband to be, to be determined
to end the marriage. The husband did not wish this to happen and begged
her not to end it. She was persuaded to consider going on with the
marriage, but decided to bolster her financial security in the process, as a
quid pro quo of not pursuing a divorce.
(viii)

As a consequence of these events the wife, in January 2014, consulted a
Solicitor, Ms Diana Parker at Withers, a leading Solicitor in the financial
remedies field. There has been no disclosure of Ms Parker’s file (so I am
unaware what the wife told Ms Parker or what advice was given about
these matters), but a document was quickly drafted by Ms Parker which
bore the title “Post-Marital Agreement” and included the narrative: “In the
event of the permanent Breakdown of the Marriage, both parties intend
and agree that their respective financial rights and obligations will be
solely as governed by this agreement…this agreement shall be treated as
binding on each of them….irrespective of their ages or medical conditions
at the date of the Permanent breakdown of the Marriage”. This document,
as Mr Rainer has accepted, sought to impose a financial outcome if the
marriage did ultimately break down, which was significantly more
advantageous to the wife than would have been the case had the matter
been referred to a court at that stage.

(ix)

It is clear from the evidence I have heard and read that the husband’s
immediate view was then he would take no issue with the proposed
agreement, whatever the appropriateness or fairness of its terms. He was in
a hurry to sign whatever document was put in front of him; but (no doubt
in order to impose more validity and enforceability on the agreement) he
was required by Ms Parker to take (and to prove that he had taken) legal
advice on the document. With this in mind the husband consulted Mr
Simon Pigott, a partner in Levison Meltzer Pigott, and another leading
Solicitor in the field of financial remedies. An email from the husband
dated 8th February 2014 shows his state of mind as he said: “(The letter
from Ms Parker) focuses only on my Parkinsons and makes no reference
to my uneven behaviour and adultery. Please let me be clear. I do not wish
to use my illness as a negotiating point…I am confident that any proposal
on behalf of my wife will be based on the provision of the best possible
outcome for SC and MC …my instructions are we will not challenge any
proposal at all”.

4

(x)

It is clear from his letter of 19th February 2014 that Mr Pigott looked
closely at the proposed agreement and was fairly horrified by its contents.
Amongst the things he recorded in that letter, having properly analysed the
agreement, were the following:“I am of the view that a fair way of resolving this matter would be for the
assets you have broadly speaking to be divided equally, but this is not
what is being provided for in this document…the net assets are worth
£5,824,000…the very maximum you would have would be £1,177,000 –
something akin to 80%/20% in SC’s favour…for these reasons I cannot
advise you that the current arrangement is fair”.

(xi)

The terms of this letter failed to pause, even for a moment, the husband’s
desire to sign the document. He quickly responded by an email dated 20th
February 2014:“I am of the view that I do NOT wish to contest any of their requirements.
Please inform Mrs Parker of my intention to sign as soon as possible”.

(xii)

Mr Pigott slowed things down a little, and sought to improve one or two of
the clauses, but the husband became impatient and, on 26th February 2014,
sent an email saying:“Given my Parkinsons it makes no sense for me to have any assets in the
long term. It is inevitable that one day I will have to stop working and
need long term care…if SC and I are no longer married, then the only
provision of care will be from the state. The state is the carer of last resort.
In that case the best outcome for SC and MC would be for SC to own all
assets as the sole owner…In summary my position is that SC should have
the maximum possible share of the assets upon a breakdown of our
marriage. Please do share this with Mrs Parker so we are all on the same
page.”

(xiii) Mr Pigott, perhaps despairing, responded to this with an email, also dated
26th February 2014, saying:“As I understand it you are offering SC Property Z as well as all the
investment properties even though she is not seeking this. You will
appreciate that this is against my advice, but I will of course act on your
instructions”.
(xiv)

On 21st March 2014, Mr Pigott saw the husband face to face at his office,
when the husband signed the agreement. Mr Pigott’s attendance note
records:“I had advised you of the effect of the agreement…I explained that
although…not binding, you had to enter into them on the basis that you
would be held to it – in other words you walk into this with your eyes wide
open. You understood. I advised you that I thought you were being overly
5

generous…you understood…you were being…financially imprudent…You
understood”.
(xv)

The wife in due course signed the document as well and by early April
2014 it became a fully executed document, on its face bearing the date of
4th April 2014.

(xvi)

And so the marriage resumed and the parties remained in a functioning
marriage until 2020. In July 2020 the parties moved together from
Property X, their long-standing family home, to Property Y in West
London.

(xvii) Unfortunately, in November 2020, the marriage completely broke down
and the parties separated. The wife remained living at Property Y and the
husband moved back to their previous family home at Property X, where
he has remained living ever since. A planned sale of Property X was
cancelled, with some cost penalties.
(xviii) Divorce proceedings were commenced on 27th January 2021. Decree Nisi
was ordered on 24th August 2021. Decree Absolute awaits the outcome of
the financial order proceedings and is not, in itself, controversial.
9. The financial remedies proceedings chronology is as follows:(i)

When instructed by the husband in January 2021, Vardags wrote to
Withers saying that they did not consider that the Post-Marital Agreement
to be “determinative, or even influential, in the resolution of this case”.

(ii)

Withers did not agree and on 28th January 2021 they issued, on behalf of
the wife, a ‘Notice to Show Cause’ as to why the terms of the 4th April
2014 Post-Marital Agreement should not be made an order of the court.
The battle lines were drawn from this early stage.

(iii)

On 17th February 2021 the wife issued Form A, to supplement the ‘Notice
to Show Cause’ application and the two applications have been case
managed alongside each other since then.

(iv)

The case went through a number of normal directions hearings before the
court-based FDR before DJ Ashworth on 28th July 2021 (which did not
result in a settlement).

(v)

Subsequent to the FDR I have dealt with a number of further directions
hearings (on 1st September 2021, 22nd November 2021, 3rd March 2022
and 24th March 2022).

(vi)

A final hearing has taken place before me on 5th, 6th, 19th and 20th May
2022.

6

10. In dealing with the applications overall I must, of course, consider the factors set out
in Matrimonial Causes Act 1973, section 25, together with any relevant case law.
11. Matrimonial Causes Act 1973, section 25, reads as follows:(1) It shall be the duty of the court in deciding whether to exercise its
powers under section 23, 24, 24A or 24B above and, if so, in what
manner, to have regard to all the circumstances of the case, first
consideration being given to the welfare while a minor of any child
of the family who has not attained the age of eighteen.
(2) As regards the exercise of the powers of the court under section
23(1)(a), (b) or (c), 24, 24A or 24B above in relation to a party to the
marriage, the court shall in particular have regard to the following
matters:(a) the income, earning capacity, property and other financial
resources which each of the parties to the marriage has or is
likely to have in the foreseeable future, including in the case of
earning capacity any increase in that capacity which it would in
the opinion of the court be reasonable to expect a party to the
marriage to take steps to acquire;
(b) the financial needs, obligations and responsibilities which each
of the parties to the marriage has or is likely to have in the
foreseeable future;
(c) the standard of living enjoyed by the family before the
breakdown of the marriage;
(d) the age of each party to the marriage and the duration of the
marriage;
(e) any physical or mental disability of either of the parties to the
marriage;
(f) the contributions which each of the parties has made or is likely
in the foreseeable future to make to the welfare of the family,
including any contribution by looking after the home or caring
for the family;
(g) the conduct of each of the parties, if that conduct is such that it
would in the opinion of the court be inequitable to disregard it;
(h) in the case of proceedings for divorce or nullity of marriage,
the value to each of the parties to the marriage of any benefit
which, by reason of the dissolution or annulment of the
marriage, that party will lose the chance of acquiring.

7

12. In the section 25 balancing exercise, on some analyses under the heading of ‘conduct’
in other analyses under the heading of ‘all the circumstances of the case – the
distinction doesn’t greatly matter, I will need to make an assessment of how much
weight I should attach to the terms of the Post-Marital Agreement – formally this is
the subject of the ‘Notice to Show Cause’ application. The wife’s case is that I should
attach great weight to it, that I should regard it as a magnetic factor which effectively
determines the case. The husband’s case is that I should attach little or no weight to it,
and that a broadly equal division of the assets is the fair outcome.
13. Accordingly, I need to remind myself of some law on the subject of ‘Agreements’. Mr
Rainer and Ms Mottahedan have both skilfully addressed me on the law in this area
and I have been referred (amongst others) to the following cases: Radmacher v
Granatino [2010] UKSC 42, WC v HC [2022] EWFC 22, Edgar v Edgar [1980] 1
WLR 1410, Brack v Brack [2019] 2 FLR 234 and NA v MA [2006] EWHC 2900.
14. The following principles (potentially pertinent to the present case) seem to me to
emerge from these cases:(i)

There is no material distinction in principle between an ante-nuptial
agreement and a post-nuptial agreement; but if an agreement is to carry
full weight, it is important is that each party should have all the
information that is material to his or her decision, and that each party
should intend that the agreement should govern the financial consequences
of the marriage coming to an end.

(ii)

The court should give effect to a nuptial agreement that is freely entered
into by each party with a full appreciation of its implications unless in the
circumstances prevailing it would not be fair to hold the parties to their
agreement.

(iii)

The parties are unlikely to have intended that their ante-nuptial agreement
should result, in the event of the marriage breaking up, in one partner
being left in a predicament of real need, while the other enjoys a
sufficiency or more, and such a result is likely to render it unfair to hold
the parties to their agreement. Equally if the devotion of one partner to
looking after the family and the home has left the other free to accumulate
wealth, it is likely to be unfair to hold the parties to an agreement that
entitles the latter to retain all that he or she has earned.

(iv)

The question of fairness is not to be determined by considering what the
court might now have ordered, because the fact of the agreement is

8

capable of altering what is fair.
(v)

In almost every Pre or Post Marital Agreement one or other, or both,
parties are under a degree of pressure, and emotions may run high. But in
the end, each party has to make a choice and unless undue pressure can be
demonstrated, the court will ordinarily uphold the agreement.

(vi)

It is ordinarily to be assumed that each party to a properly negotiated
agreement is a grown up and able to look after himself or herself.

(vii)

The court will need to consider whether the facts of the case give rise to
any of the standard vitiating factors. In this context the well known extract
from the judgment of Ormrod LJ in Edgar v Edgar (supra) is still regarded
as fundamental to a proper analysis:‘To decide what weight should be given, in order to reach a just result,
to a prior agreement not to claim a lump sum, regard must be had to the
conduct of both parties, leading up to the prior agreement, and to their
subsequent conduct, in consequence of it. It is not necessary in this
connection to think in formal legal terms, such as misrepresentation or
estoppel; all the circumstances as they affect each of two human beings
must be considered in the complex relationship of marriage. So, the
circumstances surrounding the making of the agreement are relevant.
Undue pressure by one side, exploitation of a dominant position to
secure an unreasonable advantage, inadequate knowledge, possibly bad
legal advice, an important change of circumstances, unforeseen or
overlooked at the time of making the agreement, are all relevant to the
question of justice between the parties. Important too is the general
proposition that formal agreements, properly and fairly arrived at with
competent legal advice, should not be displaced unless there are good
and substantial grounds for concluding that an injustice will be done by
holding the parties to the terms of their agreement. There may well be
other considerations which affect the justice of this case; the above list
is not intended to be an exclusive catalogue”.

(viii)

Unconscionable conduct such as undue pressure (falling short of duress)
will be likely to eliminate the weight to be attached to the agreement, and
other unworthy conduct, such as exploitation of a dominant position to
secure an unfair advantage, would reduce or eliminate it. The court may
take into account a party’s emotional state, and what pressures he or she
was under to agree. But that again cannot be considered in isolation from
what would have happened had he or she not been under those pressures.
In cases of this latter nature the influence one person has over another
provides scope for misuse without any specific overt acts of persuasion.
The relationship between two individuals may be such that, without more,
one of them is disposed to agree a course of action proposed by the other.
The law has long recognised the need to prevent abuse of influence in
these 'relationship' cases despite the absence of evidence of overt acts of
9

persuasive conduct. The types of relationship in which this principle falls
to be applied cannot be listed exhaustively. Relationships are infinitely
various. The principle is not confined to cases of abuse of trust and
confidence. It also includes, for instance, cases where a vulnerable person
has been exploited. Indeed, there is no single touchstone for determining
whether the principle is applicable. Several expressions have been used in
an endeavour to encapsulate the essence: trust and confidence, reliance,
dependence or vulnerability on the one hand and ascendancy, domination
or control on the other. None of these descriptions is perfect. None is all
embracing. Each has its proper place.
(ix)

Even if the court reaches the conclusion that there are no vitiating factors
as such, the court retains an overall section 25 discretion and should not, in
its search for a fair outcome, necessarily regard itself as being within a
straightjacket and thus driven inexorably to a needs-based outcome with a
disregard of the sharing principle.

15. Accordingly, I bear in mind that I must give first consideration to the welfare while a
minor of any child of the family who has not attained the age of eighteen. In this case
MC is (just) under 18; but whichever of the range of outcomes I select here I am
confident that the needs of MC will be met comfortably, so it is not necessary for me
to dwell further on this issue.
16. In relation to the “property and other financial resources which each of the
parties to the marriage has or is likely to have in the foreseeable future” most of
the figures are not controversial and I need only deal with the following areas of
disagreement:(i)

It is clear that the parties own some chattels of significant value (two
Mercedes motor cars, a collection of Indian miniatures, a collection of art,
antique furniture, watches and jewellery). At close of submissions there
was an expectation that the parties would be able to agree an in specie
division of these chattels (and I am hoping I will be told about this in due
course) so I propose not to say anything more about this at this stage and I
do not propose to include these chattels on my asset schedule.

(ii)

There is an issue over ‘historic tax’ liabilities, which I shall touch on
below, but which in essence I propose to deal with as a joint debt. For the
purposes of my asset schedule I propose to include a debt at the ‘worst
case scenario’ end of the scale, i.e. £169,537.

17. Having made these determinations I am now able to set out my assessment of the
assets and debts for distribution in this case.
18. The situation can be summarised as follows:-

10

REALISABLE ASSETS/DEBTS
Joint
Property X1
Property Z2
Property Y3
Rental Property A4
Rental Property B5
Rental Property C6
Rental Property D 7
Rental Property E 8
Rental Property F 9
Rental Property G 10
Property Co Ltd
Investment Property Co Ltd
Potential historic tax debt
TOTAL

1,783,657
544,003
1,343,223
185,220
148,478
107,983
128,240
108,341
157,516
145,875
17,775
502,397
-169,537
5,003,171

Wife
50% x Property H11
Bank accounts in sole name
Investments/Policies in sole name
Monies owed by newspaper
Sole tax debt
Monies owed to W’s mother
Litigation Loan debt
Outstanding Legal Costs 12
TOTAL

213,400
66,852
63,318
150
-3,036
-20,000
-44,378
-69,763
206,543

1

This figure is based on a value of £1,850,000 less sale costs and CGT = £1,783,657
This figure is based on a value of £539,000 less sale costs and CGT = £544,003
3
This figure is based on a value of £2,350,000 less sale costs and CGT and an outstanding mortgage of
£674,878 = £1,343,223
4
This figure is based on a value of £575,000 less sale costs and CGT and an outstanding mortgage of £320,494
= £185,220
5
This figure is based on a value of £610,000 less sale costs and CGT and an outstanding mortgage of £356,326
= £148,478
6
This figure is based on a value of £500,000 less sale costs and CGT and an outstanding mortgage of £320,696
= £107,983
7
This figure is based on a value of £580,000 less sale costs and CGT and an outstanding mortgage of £365,302
= £128,240
8
This figure is based on a value of £490,000 less sale costs and CGT and an outstanding mortgage of £312,033
= £108,341
9
This figure is based on a value of £565,000 less sale costs and CGT and an outstanding mortgage of £320,494
= £157,516
10
This figure is based on a value of £630,000 less sale costs and CGT and an outstanding mortgage of £407,157
= £145,875
11
This figure is based on a value of £440,000 less sale costs and CGT = £426,800 x 50% = £213,400
12
This figure is based on a total of incurred fees of £280,482 less a total of fees paid of £210,719 = £69,763
2

11

Husband
Bank accounts in sole name
Investments/Policies in sole name
Sole tax debt
Credit card debt
Litigation loan debt
Outstanding accountants fees
Outstanding Legal Costs 13
TOTAL

12,495
630
-23,000
-6,333
-292,665
-1,710
-42,498
-353,081
PENSION ASSETS

Wife
Aviva pension CE
TOTAL

6,461
6,461

Husband
AJ Bell SIPP CE
ABC UK pension – in payment - CE
Z Bank pension – in payment - CE
TOTAL

147,150
289,565
174,670
611,385

19. In relation to “the income, earning capacity…which each of the parties to the
marriage has or is likely to have in the foreseeable future, including in the case of
earning capacity any increase in that capacity which it would in the opinion of
the court be reasonable to expect a party to the marriage to take steps to
acquire” the following picture emerged:-

13

(i)

The husband is in receipt of pension income (£5,827 per annum gross from
his ABC UK pension, £3,695 per annum gross from his Z Bank pension)
and he also receives state benefits (PIPs) in the sum of £7,912 per annum.
It is common ground he will not work in paid employment again because
of his neurological condition.

(ii)

The wife works as an administrator earning £19,356 per annum net and
also receives (just – it will very shortly cease) child benefit for MC. It has
been suggested that the wife could earn more than she is – and she
certainly has the talent and ability to do so, albeit without much recent
work experience – but this argument has played a modest part of this case
and the wife has not sought to argue a needs based claim beyond her
‘agreement’ claim or even her ‘sharing’ claim, so it is not necessary to
look at this in detail.

This figure is based on a total of incurred fees of £418,236 less a total of fees paid of £375,738 = £42,498

12

(iii)

There is also income from the investment properties, but in the context of
this dispute (where these are likely to be sold, whatever is the outcome) it
is perhaps unhelpful to look at this in detail.

20. I want to say something at this stage about the sharing principle. As a starting point
in the division of capital after a long marriage it is useful to observe that fairness and
equality usually ride hand in hand and that (save when there are particular reasons)
the court should be slow to go down the road of departing from equality.
21. In the words of Lord Nicholls in White v White [2000] UKHL 54:“…a judge would always be well advised to check his tentative views against the
yardstick of equality of division. As a general guide, equality should be departed from
only if, and to the extent that, there is good reason for doing so. The need to consider
and articulate reasons for departing from equality would help the parties and the
court to focus on the need to ensure the absence of discrimination”.
and in Miller v Miller; McFarlane v McFarlane [2006] UKHL 24:"This 'equal sharing' principle derives from the basic concept of equality permeating
a marriage as understood today. Marriage, it is often said, is a partnership of
equals…The parties commit themselves to sharing their lives. They live and work
together. When their partnership ends each is entitled to an equal share of the assets
of the partnership, unless there is a good reason to the contrary. Fairness requires no
less. But I emphasise the qualifying phrase: 'unless there is good reason to the
contrary'. The yardstick of equality is to be applied as an aid, not a rule."
22. In the words of Mostyn J in JL v SL [2015] EWHC 360:“Matrimonial property is the property which the parties have built up by their joint
(but inevitably different) efforts during the span of their partnership. It should be
divided equally. This principle is reflected in statutory systems in other jurisdictions.
It resonates with moral and philosophical values. It promotes equality and banishes
discrimination.”
23. In this case the husband argues for an equal division of assets; but the wife argues for
a substantial departure from equality in her favour.
24. Since the main reason for the departure from equality relates to the existence of a
Post-Marital Agreement, I propose next to deal with the ‘agreement’ related issues.
25. The Post-Marital Agreement of 4th April 2014 has some features which place it firmly
13

in the category of agreement to which the court should attach weight. There was
proper disclosure. Both parties had proper, indeed top quality, contemporaneous legal
advice. The agreement is drafted very professionally and is clear in its content. Both
parties were, when it was signed, of mature years and high intelligence and ability
and, certainly on one level, knew exactly what they were doing.
26. It was (initially at least) part of the husband’s case that the agreement had been
procured by the ‘blackmail’ threats of the wife to inform his parents about his visit to
a sex worker if he did not sign the agreement; but, as the case developed, the evidence
did not suggest this was a powerful argument and it was (I think appropriately) not
really pursued with vigour by the end of the case. It emerged in the evidence that the
husband’s mother knew about the sex worker event at least by (and probably earlier
than) the wife’s text message of 14th February 2014 and so a ‘blackmail’ strategy was
unlikely to be of much effect – and I accept the wife’s evidence on this that the
husband was aware before he signed the agreement that his mother knew what had
happened. Further, the evidence for the making of a threat was weak and, of course,
the husband was not in a position to give oral evidence to maintain what he had said
on this subject prior to his losing mental capacity. Further, the disclosure from the
husband’s 2014 Solicitors file did not support the proposition that ‘blackmail’ played
any part in the husband’s decision-making in early 2014. In so far as the ‘blackmail’
argument is still being pursued (and it has not been formally abandoned) I reject this
as a reason for vitiating the agreement.
27. For me, however, that is not the end of the matter. A number of questions have
troubled me in thinking about this case. Why would somebody engaging in rational
thought sign a document which was so manifestly to his disadvantage? Why would
somebody who had a clear entitlement to assets worth perhaps £2,500,000 or more
sign a document restricting his claim to a sum in the region of £1,000,000? In the
search for fairness it is adequate to say “well, he knew the gamble he was taking”? In
the search for fairness is it adequate to say that he was appropriately rewarded by
receiving the benefit of the possibility of a continuing marriage, albeit one which
might end a few years later, which he otherwise was not going to have? In the search
for fairness, how should the court deal with the husband’s apparent wish to have less
money or even no money to meet his likely future care needs, so as to make himself
dependent on local authority support? How should a court deal with a clause in a
Post-Marital Agreement which invites the disregard of needs arising from a medical
condition, in particular where the existence of those likely future needs is known
about at the time the agreement was drafted? In the search for fairness, is a person
giving away assets to which he has a secure entitlement to secure the resumption of a
marriage to be treated any differently from a person (such as Mr Granatino) who
gives away the possibility of sharing in pre-marital assets to secure the
commencement of a marriage?
28. In pondering these questions I need to give careful thought to the medical condition of
the husband. In this context I note the conclusions of the neurological experts, most
conveniently to be found in the joint statement from Dr Paviour and Dr Gross dated
14

3rd March 2022, which includes some agreed statements about the husband’s
condition which can perhaps be summarised as follows:(i)

He has a progressive extra pyramidical syndrome with some features
consistent with a diagnosis of young adult onset Parkinson’s Disease. This
is a neurodegenerative disease which means that brain cells (neurons)
involved in the control of balance, movement and cognition are being lost
at a faster rate than is normal in healthy aging. The likely onset of this
disease process was around 2003-4 with a formal diagnosis in 2011.

(ii)

By 2022 he had evident cognitive dysfunction and probable autonomic
dysfunction. This is likely to continue to progress, although the recent
‘shunt’ treatment (CSF diversion procedure) has caused some
improvement, this improvement will, on a balance of probabilities, decline
over time, perhaps over the next three to five years.

(iii)

He is likely to have substantial and increasing dependency on carers in the
years ahead. This will in due course need to be more from professionals
than family members and ultimately care in a care home or nursing home
environment.

(iv)

In so far as life expectancy can be accurately predicted, the best case
scenario is 10 to 15 years, the middling case scenario is 7 to 9 years and
the worst case scenario is 5 to 7 years.

29. These experts have not specifically been asked to comment on the situation as it was
in late 2013 and early 2014 in the context of the Post-Marital Agreement; but I have
thought it appropriate to look at the contemporaneous evidence which exists in the
context of a general impression that the husband’s thinking and decision-making at
that time was, to an extent, being affected by aspects of or relating to his neurological
condition and the treatment being received for it. Ms Mottahedan has skillfully drawn
together some of the available evidence of the husband’s presentation in late 2013 and
early 2014 (and in the periods before and after those dates) which, though falling
short of any suggestion that the husband lacked formal mental capacity to sign the
agreement at that time, create some significant question marks over what was really
going on in his head.
30. Amongst the pieces of contemporaneous evidence drawn to my attention are the
following:(i)

There are a number of documents which appear to have been
contemporaneously created by the husband as notes to himself which
record the distress and despair he felt in himself as a result of his condition
and the limitations it placed on his life. The note of 11th May 2009
15

recorded his distress at being dismissed by Bank A because his mobility
issues, and stumbling gait, caused somebody to complain that he had been
drunk at work. The note of 21st May 2012 records: “Oh me. I fear being
alone, dying alone, having no purpose, being a failure, being in pain...In a
sense if the disease kills me then it would be clear cut. No lingering pain
for me...The unwelcome guest, what can he do to me. There is hope we can
keep him in his corner…it would be better if the disease was quick and
fatal”. The note of 4th June 2012 records: “no one knows the shame and
pity it will bring…I hate to be pitied. All I ever wanted was to be a success
but privately I am a fraud. I am ashamed to say that I have Parkinsons”.
The note of 25th January 2013 records: “The realisation hits home. I have
nothing left to offer you. I am past my sell by date”. The wife accepted in
her oral evidence that the husband had been made “profoundly depressed”
by his condition and these notes to himself rather confirm that depression
and self-loathing was a feature of his presentation in the period leading up
to the visit to the sex worker and the subsequent signing of the agreement.
(ii)

The evidence suggests that the husband, in and about January 2014, had
formed the view that the wife was conducting an affair with her
gynaecologist and he became pre-occupied with what their sexual intimacy
might consist of and asked her questions about it. The wife told me that
there was no truth in this and that this was a paranoid thought by the
husband and I accept what she says about this. For me, these apparently
paranoid assertions are perhaps corroborative of the thought that the
husband’s mind and decision-making was not working properly at this
stage. It is difficult to disaggregate the constituent parts, but my
impression is that this was tied up with his feeling of guilt and remorse
about visiting the sex worker in December 2013.

(iii)

The contemporaneous medical evidence suggests that the husband did
have some significant medical issues in the early months of 2014 which
are pertinent to this discussion. The reports of Dr AB (a treating
Consultant Haemato-Oncologist reporting on 22nd January 2014) and Dr
AK (a treating Consultant Neurologist reporting on 24th January 2014)
both that the testosterone which the husband had been receiving since May
2013 for his pituitary insufficiency had caused him to suffer from
polycythaemia in early 2014 (the NHS website suggests that some
symptoms of this condition are tiredness and confusion). Dr AK (who had
been treating the husband for some time by then and knew him well) saw
the husband on 24th January 2014, prescribed Madopar and commented
that “he was not at all himself” and asked him to come to a return
appointment “in a few weeks time”. Further, the medical notes confirm that
the husband was admitted to hospital on 25th February 2014 with possible
“acute coronary syndrome” and was kept overnight, having had left sided
chest pain for two weeks prior to admission, possibly related to
commencing the Madopar medication, and had high Haemoglobin and
Eosinophil counts of concern.
16

31. In this context I also need to consider the case in the context of the legal principle
that: “The court should give effect to a nuptial agreement that is freely entered into by
each party with a full appreciation of its implications unless in the circumstances
prevailing it would not be fair to hold the parties to their agreement…The parties are
unlikely to have intended that their ante-nuptial agreement should result, in the event
of the marriage breaking up, in one partner being left in a predicament of real need”.
How should a judgment be made on this question in the context that the agreement
itself appears to invite the court to disregard needs related to a medical condition.
How does this proposition fit with the search for fairness?
32. What needs does the husband have? It has the following elements:(i)

He has a housing need. Just because the husband has a serious medical
condition, and has significant and worsening disabilities, his social needs
should not in my view be disregarded. His lack of litigation capacity does
not mean that he does not reasonably need the things which other people
without disabilities reasonably need – in particular a reasonably
comfortable house. In my view there is a strong case on the facts here for
arguing that he reasonably needs to remain in the familiar surroundings of
the house that has been his home for many years, that is Property X, and I
find myself unattracted by the wife’s arguments that it would be fair to
provide a much less valuable home for him (Mr Rainer’s closing
submissions suggest a house at £675,000 would be adequate to meet his
need). She wishes to continue living in a house with a value of £2,350,000.
It seems to me not at all unreasonable for him to wish to continue living in
a house with a value of £1,850,000.

(ii)

Further, the husband has real and identifiable needs for home care. The
evidence suggests that there may well come a time when his care needs are
such that he will objectively need to be in a nursing home or a care home –
which will be cheaper in costs terms than living at home with a bespoke
care package; but Ms Mottahedan invites me to note the evidence that the
husband has a strong view that he wishes to remain living at home (as to
opposed to living in a care home) for as long as this is possible. Indeed,
one of the reasons for the separation in 2020 was the husband’s perception
and fear that the wife would be likely to put the husband in a care home at
the earliest opportunity – a fear which was rather confirmed by the
evidence which the wife gave on this subject before me. My view is that
the husband does have a real and identifiable need for home care, which
may be over a long period, and any needs assessment needs to take this
into account. I reject as unfair any suggestion that the agreement’s
invitation to ignore medical condition should be treated as overriding the
requirement for the court to make an assessment of need.

(iii)

In terms of the quantum of the need I propose to adopt the analysis of Ms
Amy Goddard, the Senior Occupational Therapist, who has suggested that
17

if the husband remains at home with a bespoke care package, and lives to
the highest end of the life expectancy range, then he would need to fund
care costs to a sum of £1,603,684.
(iv)

The sum of £1,850,000 and £1,603,684 is above a half share of the assets
in this case. Ms Mottahedan says this: “The reality is that the full extent of
the husband’s needs cannot be met on a 50% share of the assets. But he
will take his half share and balance his housing, income and care needs at
different points in time by the people who care for him and love him”. I
find myself very much in agreement with this approach.

(v)

Mr Rainer has suggested a counter-argument: “Can H manage his twilight
years…with medical needs effectively underwritten by the state in
circumstances where he himself foresaw and wished for this outcome in
2014? W says yes. There may be less needs headroom/cushioning than the
court would otherwise order absent the agreement, but H knew this in
2014 and welcomed it with clear eyes and open arms”. Although Mr
Rainer has put this view powerfully and cogently, I find myself not
agreeing with this approach. Is it fair that if his home care budget should
run out and the husband be left with no option other than local authorityfunded care home provision? Is it fair that his choices should be removed
from him in this way? In my view the suggestion of Mr Rainer falls foul of
the Radmacher v Granatino (supra) fairness test and would be quite likely
(perhaps unless he died very much at the worst case scenario end of the
scale) to leave the husband in a predicament of real need.

33. In summary on this area of the case, I have reached the conclusion that it would be
wrong for me to place weight on the Pre-Marital Agreement. Not only was it very
much to the husband’s disadvantage in financial terms, I have reached the overall
conclusion that, at the time that it was signed, he was a vulnerable person (in the ways
described above) and the wife rather took advantage of that vulnerable situation to
gain a substantial financial advantage. I reject the suggestion that she engaged in
blackmail or direct threats or that she imposed any direct pressure; but (not thinking
in “formal legal terms”, rather considering “all the circumstances as they affect each
of two human beings…in the complex relationship of marriage”) it is my view that
the agreement was not a fair one. In my view this is a case where these words
resonate: “The relationship between two individuals may be such that, without more,
one of them is disposed to agree a course of action proposed by the other. The law
has long recognised the need to prevent abuse of influence in these 'relationship'
cases despite the absence of evidence of overt acts of persuasive conduct.”
34. Further, I have reached the conclusion that to enforce the agreement runs the risk of
leaving the husband in a predicament of real need, possibly leaving him in inadequate
accommodation and/or running the risk that he would have no option other than to do
the one thing he wants to avoid – going into a care home. For me, the fact that his
own words contemplated this situation in 2014 does not, given the question marks
over his decision-making ability in 2014, change my view that it would be unfair to
18

hold him to the strict terms of the agreement.
35. In relation to the “financial needs, obligations and responsibilities which each of
the parties to the marriage has or is likely to have in the foreseeable future” I
have really dealt with these in the paragraphs above. Likewise, I have had in my mind
the standard of living that the parties jointly enjoyed during the marriage, the ages of
the parties, the duration of the marriage, the respective contributions of the
parties, the conduct of the parties and disability. I have nothing more to add on these
subjects.
36. It will be apparent from the above that I have reached the overall conclusion that the
right way for me to deal with this case is to divide the assets equally. A number of
particular questions arise as to how that should be done.
37. As far as the ‘historic tax’ liability is concerned I propose to regard that as a joint debt
to which each party should contribute equally (in so far as a debt arises) and the
parties should cooperate to minimise. The possible liability arises from the fact that
for tax purposes the rent from the investment properties were declared (I believe for
quite a number of years) as having been divided 90:10 in the wife’s favour (so
attracting a lower rate of tax because of her lower employment earnings). It has
emerged that, in fact, to claim this differential it was necessary for some formal
documentation to be executed and (possibly) served on HMRC evidencing the fact
that this division was a common intention. Although it is agreed that this was the
common intention, it appears that the necessary documentation was not executed
and/or served. It may still be possible to argue with HMRC that all is in order, but it
may not. At present this is uncertain. I am content to record in my order a recital /
finding that it was the parties’ common intention that this was the situation, and I am
told this may help the argument with HMRC, but my order needs to be drafted in a
way that this is an ongoing project in relation to which both parties should cooperate.
38. In terms of a division, it seems to be common ground that the husband should have
Property X transferred to him and the wife should have Property Y transferred to her.
39. In relation to the other jointly owned properties (and I include the two companies in
this) I propose to order that they should be transferred to the wife with a credit of the
figure in the asset schedule (if she wishes to keep them or any of them) or sold (if she
does not wish to keep them or any of them). There will be an equalisation payment
based on the figure in the asset schedule (if retained) or the actual net sale proceeds (if
sold). Undoubtedly some timing issues will arise from this which will need to be
addressed in the order.
40. The cash/investments/policies should remain where they are; but the equalisation
payment calculated by reference to the figure in my schedule.
19

41. As far as the pensions are concerned, there is a difference of opinion and I need to
have in mind the section 25 factor of the loss of potential pension benefits arising
from the divorce and whether or not there is anything to be gained from any pension
sharing order. In this case, because other issues have no doubt been more pressing,
there is no PODE report to suggest what may be the most advantageous way to
proceed from an actuarial perspective. I propose to say the following:(i)

I do not agree with the suggestion (if it indeed is being made) that the
husband’s defined benefit pensions should be treated as having a zero
value in his hands because they are in payment.

(ii)

I do not have any evidence to tell me whether the making of a pension
sharing order here will have the effect of unnecessarily destroying value;
but nobody here has suggested that it would be the case.

(iii)

Any pension sharing order in favour of the wife would give access to cash
by allowing (if she so chose) the wife to pay the credit into a personal
pension scheme which could then be cashed in, albeit subject to tax.

(iv)

I therefore propose to make the following orders. I will make 100%
pension sharing orders against the husband’s pensions with ABC UK and
Z Bank. I will otherwise leave the pensions where they stand. For the
purposes of the calculation of the equalisation payment, I agree with the
suggestion that a 30% notional tax deduction should be made against all
the pension CEs to reflect the likely cost of turning these assets into cash.

42. This is my decision and I invite counsel to produce a draft order which matches these
conclusions.
43. When I formally hand down this judgment I wish to have a discussion with counsel
and the parties about the publication of this judgment on TNA / BAILII and what
anonymisations/redactions are to be sought. My provisional view is that the judgment
should be published, but anonymously, and with appropriate redactions to prevent the
identification of the parties by any reader, but allowing the reader to understand the
decision and the reasons for it. If I do approve this course, I will invite Counsel in the
first instance to try and agree a redacted and anonymised version for publication.

HHJ Edward Hess
Central Family Court
20

20th May 2022

21

