The husband Mr TC is aged 58. He worked successfully for many years in the
field of international investment banking, but has not worked since June
2020 as a result of his increasingly debilitating neurological condition, of
which more detail later.

The wife SC is aged 50. She is an intelligent and able person, having taken her
university education through an Undergraduate Degree at a leading
university and on to a Masters level, and worked for a while for NGOs, but
has largely been a homemaker in more recent times.

They met in 1994 and married in 1994. In 1998 the parties jointly
purchased Property X in north London and that became the family home
for more than twenty years. They also
owned multiple other valuable residential and investment properties acquired during the marriage.

The marriage produced one child: MC (now aged 17, very nearly 18, and
currently in his last days and weeks at a private boarding school).

The parties prospered financially during the marriage and purchased a
substantial number of valuable real properties, both as homes and as
investments. My clear impression is that most of the money for these
investments came from the husband’s substantial earnings; but that the
wife was involved in the buying and managing process and her name
appears on the legal title and mortgage of most of the properties. In this
sense the purchase and management of real properties was very much a
team effort.

From about 2003/2004 the husband began to experience the early effects
of Parkinson’s Disease and his condition was formally diagnosed in 2011
and has progressively deteriorated, of which more detail later.

At least by 2013 (and probably significantly before that) the marriage had
become unhappy and turbulent and the absence of sexual intimacy in their
relationship was a source of distress to the husband. In late December
2013 matters took a dramatic turn. The husband decided to visit a sex
worker. He quickly felt guilty and ashamed about what he had done and
regretted his action. In early January 2014 he told the wife what had
happened. Very understandably, she was not happy to hear what she was
told and my perception is that she acted with a mixture of distress and
anger. One (I think representative) example of her contemporaneous
thinking about this event is contained in the text message sent by her to the
husband’s mother on 14th February 2014 which includes the comment: “I
cry for the death of my husband! My husband died the day he went to see
that prostitute in December”. She was not minded readily to forgive the
husband for his transgression. In her witness statement, she says: “I felt
emotionally devastated and was in a terrible place personally”. Her initial
reaction was, or certainly appeared to the husband to be, to be determined
to end the marriage. The husband did not wish this to happen and begged
her not to end it. She was persuaded to consider going on with the
marriage, but decided to bolster her financial security in the process, as a
quid pro quo of not pursuing a divorce.


“In the event of the permanent Breakdown of the Marriage, both parties intend
and agree that their respective financial rights and obligations will be
solely as governed by this agreement…this agreement shall be treated as
binding on each of them….irrespective of their ages or medical conditions
at the date of the Permanent breakdown of the Marriage”. This document,
as Mr Rainer has accepted, sought to impose a financial outcome if the
marriage did ultimately break down, which was significantly more
advantageous to the wife than would have been the case had the matter
been referred to a court at that stage.


The husband’s immediate view was then he would take no issue with the proposed
agreement, whatever the appropriateness or fairness of its terms. He was in
a hurry to sign whatever document was put in front of him; but (no doubt
in order to impose more validity and enforceability on the agreement) he
was required by Ms Parker to take (and to prove that he had taken) legal
advice on the document. With this in mind the husband consulted Mr
Simon Pigott, a partner in Levison Meltzer Pigott, and another leading
Solicitor in the field of financial remedies. An email from the husband
dated 8th February 2014 shows his state of mind as he said: “(The letter
from Ms Parker) focuses only on my Parkinsons and makes no reference
to my uneven behaviour and adultery. Please let me be clear. I do not wish
to use my illness as a negotiating point…I am confident that any proposal
on behalf of my wife will be based on the provision of the best possible
outcome for SC and MC …my instructions are we will not challenge any
proposal at all”.


the net assets are worth
£5,824,000…the very maximum you would have would be £1,177,000 –
something akin to 80%/20% in SC’s favour

the husband’s quickly responded “I am of the view that I do NOT wish to contest any of their requirements.
Please inform Mrs Parker of my intention to sign as soon as possible”.

Mr Pigott slowed things down a little, and sought to improve one or two of
the clauses, but the husband became impatient and, on 26th February 2014,
sent an email saying:“Given my Parkinsons it makes no sense for me to have any assets in the
long term. It is inevitable that one day I will have to stop working and
need long term care…if SC and I are no longer married, then the only
provision of care will be from the state. The state is the carer of last resort.
In that case the best outcome for SC and MC would be for SC to own all
assets as the sole owner…In summary my position is that SC should have
the maximum possible share of the assets upon a breakdown of our
marriage. Please do share this with Mrs Parker so we are all on the same
page.”

As I understand it you are offering SC Property Z as well as all the
investment properties even though she is not seeking this. 

“In the event of the permanent Breakdown of the Marriage, both parties intend
and agree that their respective financial rights and obligations will be
solely as governed by this agreement…this agreement shall be treated as
binding on each of them….irrespective of their ages or medical conditions
at the date of the Permanent breakdown of the Marriage”

The agreement should not be reviewed or varied in the event of a change
in circumstances, including the husband’s health deteriorating further.

At the time of signing (2014), their total net assets were approximately £5,824,000.
Under the proposed post-marital agreement, husband was advised he'd receive only about £1,177,000 (~20% of total assets), substantially less than an equal division.

Both parties received high-quality legal advice.
Husband explicitly instructed his solicitor to accept any terms without contestation, even against explicit advice.
