The parties lived together in Listowel, Ontario, from
June 1995 until their marriage on June 22, 1996. A Prenuptial 
agreemen was signed two days before the wedding between
Richard Bruce LeVan (the "husband") and Erika Margaret LeVan
(the "wife").

The husband and his family owned the majority of shares in W Inc. 
The husband's father wished to
ensure that shares of that company stayed within the family.
Family members entered into certain agreements which provided
that any family member who wished to continue to hold shares in
W Inc. had to enter into a marriage contract.

Before the parties' marriage, the husband informed the wife that a
marriage contract had to be signed or the wedding would not
take place. He told her that the sole purpose of the contract
was to keep shares of W Inc. in the family.

The contract excluded all of the
husband's business interests from net family property and
severely restricted the wife's right to support.

At the time the marriage contract was signed, the husband
was a very wealthy man. The husband and his family own the
majority of shares of Wescast Industries Inc. ("Wescast"), the
world's largest manufacturer of exhaust manifolds, and a
publicly traded company. Mr. LeVan, Sr., together with his
wife, created a complex corporate structure that
included a number of different companies and a family trust
(the "LeVan Family Trust").

In 1996, the husband and his three siblings each held 25
per cent of the common shares of three companies within the
corporate structure: RyVan Inc. ("RyVan"), Grannyco Investments
Ltd. ("Grannyco") and RWL Investments Ltd. ("RWL"). In
addition, all four siblings were the sole beneficiaries of the
LeVan Family Trust, in which there were significant assets. 

It was always the desire of Mr. LeVan, Sr. to protect the
shares of the family company. Thus, any child contemplating
marriage was instructed to enter into a pre-nuptial agreement,
or marriage contract, in which it was provided that the
proposed spouse release all claims to Wescast shares. In this
way, Mr. LeVan, Sr. intended to keep the shares of the family
company within the family.

As it was frequently the subject of
conversation around the dinner table at family gatherings, the
husband, his siblings and their prospective partners knew of
the desire to maintain control of Wescast shares within the
family.

The model marriage contract contained provisions to
protect the LeVan family's control of Wescast. The
agreements restricted the actions that could be taken directly
against the LeVan family companies and stipulated the method of
valuation of the LeVan company shares for the purposes of a
property or support claim.

Before their engagement in December
1995, the wife was aware that if she and Mr. LeVan were
to marry, they would have to enter into a marriage contract as
Mr. LeVan, Sr. wanted to make sure that the Wescast shares
stayed within the family.

Ms. Bales' first draft of the contract, which she sent
to the husband, provided that the LeVan companies were to be
treated as excluded property, including any property into which
they could be traced.

Schedule A was the only financial disclosure provided by
the husband. It indicated that the husband had no debts. His
net worth was disclosed as "$80,000 + LeVan Family Companies
interest" (the Trust). It disclosed that the $80,000 was held in RRSPs,
bank accounts and the original house deposit. It disclosed that
the husband owned 100 common shares in RyVan Inc. This Schedule
was accompanied by a declaration that each party had fully and
completely disclosed to the other the nature and extent of all
of his or her significant assets.

the husband's contingent interest in the Trust had a "very minimal
value" at the date of marriage

The husband did not wish to pay the wife support in the event of a
marriage breakdown. A significant change in the final
draft was the insertion of para. 8 (c), which severely
restricted the wife's right to claim support if there was a
marriage breakdown.

As the trial judge found, in the contract that was signed, the wife's
ability to claim spousal support, contrary to the model
marriage contracts, was significantly compromised. She gave up
her right to share in the increase in value of virtually all of
the husband's assets without knowing the husband's income from
all sources, and without having any idea of his net worth.

The husband did not want his wife to know his income
or the value of his assets because he wanted to control their
lifestyle during marriage.

There are two young children of the marriage.